You must have heard the term git and github, or maybe you've been using it for a while, but it still seems confusing?

Just for the record, Git and Github are two different things. Git is primarily a version control system that can be integrated literally in any software development pipeline. In contrast, Github is an online platform that provides hosting for software that uses Git as version control.

Git can be tricky. There are times when you just try to push your code, but your branches are out of sync, and you end up wasting much time there.

Let's see how to use Git properly to focus your time on writing productive code.

Install & Setup

Install Git using the following command :

sudo apt install git

If you are on windows, you show install git bash. Click Here to install git bash in windows.

Setup for newly installed Git

git config global user.name "User Name"

git config global user.email "email"

Basic version control

Go to your project directory and run `git init` to make this project as a git repository. This will create a `.git` folder in your project, which will be used to store all the versions.

To start with version controlling for an existing project, you can add those files and do an initial commit.

git add file

git commit -m 'first commit'

This version is still a local repository; you can go to Github and create a new repository online and link it to your local git repository.

git remote add origin https://github.com/user/repo.git

An example with a repository of mine

git remote add origin https://github.com/viral-sangani/MeTube.git

Then you can push the code to online Github repository by just running this command,

git push origin master

voila! You’ve code is on Github!

Knowing the Git

Checking the status

To determine which file are in which state, we use `git status`. It allows you to see which files in your project are changed, which files are staged, and which files are committed.

If you create a new file which is not in your project and run this command, see this

git status

This command is probably the most used in Git.

Adding file in git

There are few ways to add files in Git.

There are cases when you want to add files manually, but most of the time, we tend to add all the changed files. There are more efficient ways to do so instead of adding all the files manually.

Adding files one by one
git add filename

Adding all files in the current directory
git add -A

Adding all files changes in the current directory
git add .

Choosing what changes to add (this will get through all your  changes and you can 'Y' or 'N' the changes)
git add -p

Committing your work

Usually, people commit using basic command `git commit -m "<message>`, but there are some excellent ways to commit your changes.

git commit -m 'commit message'
This is typically used for shorter commit messages

git commit filename -m 'commit message'
Add file and commit in one shot

git commit -am 'insert commit message'
Add file and commit the staged file

git commit --amend 'new commit message'
Changing your most recent commit message


git rebase -i
Combine a sequence of commits into a single one
You might use this to organize a messy commit history

This will give you an interface on your code editor:
Commands:
  pick = use commit
  reword = use commit, but edit the commit message
  edit = use commit but stop for amending
  squash = use to commit, but meld into the previous commit
  fixup = like "squash", but discard this commit's log message
  exec = run command (the rest of the line) using shell
```

Branch and Merge

The master branch always contains working and stable code. There are some cases where you want to work on new features, or you want to solve some bugs or just want to keep the backup of the current stable version.

Branching helps you to work on a separate copy of your code without harming the master branch. When you first create a branch, it will create an exact copy of the current version; then, you can make changes independently in the new branch. Once you are confident enough and your new feature is ready, you can just merge it in the master branch.

Just remember, it's not a good practice to do the changes directly on the master branch. Always create a branch, make the changes, and merge the code into master.

Branching

git checkout -b branch_name
Create a local branch to work on

git checkout branch_1
git checkout branch_2
Switching between 2 branches

git push -u origin branch_2
Pushing your new local branch to remote as a backup

git branch -d branch_2
Deleting a local branch - this won't let you delete a branch  that hasn't been merged yet

git branch -D branch_2
Deleting a local branch - this WILL delete a branch even if it hasn't been merged yet!

git branch -a
Viewing all current branches for the repository, including both local and remote branches. Great to see if you already have a branch for a particular feature addition, especially on more significant projects


git branch
Viewing all local branches

git branch -r
Viewing all remote branches

Git rebase origin/master
Rebase master branch into the local branch

git push origin +branchname
Pushing local branch after rebasing master into the local branch

Merging

Now, let's see how to merge the branch to the master branch.

git checkout master
First make sure you're looking at the master branch

git merge branch_2
Now merge your branch to master

There are some cases when you can get a CONFLICT error while merging the code. Git will show you the exact file where CONFLICT occurred, and after resolving the CONFLICT, you have to commit the current version.

Backtracking

Things go wrong sometimes, and we should know how to fix it.
Git has everything you need to make a mistake with the code you push, overwrite something, or just want to correct something you pushed.

git reset HEAD
git reset HEAD -- filename
Switch to the version of the code of the most recent commit

git reset HEAD caret -- filename
git reset HEAD caret -- filename
Switch to the version of the code before the most recent commit

git reset HEAD tilt 3 -- filename
git reset HEAD tilt 3 -- filename
git reset HEAD tilt 5 -- filename
git reset HEAD tilt 5 -- filename
Switchback 3 or 5 commits

git reset 23FE2RE -- filename
git reset 23FE2RE -- filename
Switch back to a specific commit Where the '23FE2RE' is the commit ID

The previous commands were what's known as "soft" resets.
Your code is reset, but Git will still keep a copy of the other code
handy in case you need it. On the other hand, the --hard flag
tells Git to overwrite all changes in the working directory.

Think before using this command
git reset --hard 23FE2RE

Tips for Git

If you are working in the team, and because of some noob developer, your code gets corrupted or you end up having issues. For cases like this, git provide a tool called `blame`, which will tell you precisely whom to blame for the issue you are facing.

git blame 'filename'
Show alteration history of a file with the name of the author

git blame 'filename' -l
Show alteration history of a file with the name of the author and the git commit ID

Git logging

I use `git log` most of the time.
It will show you all the commits in your branch and will show you the current status of other branches too.

git log
Show a list of all commits in a repository. This command shows everything about a commit, such as a commit ID, author, date and commit message.

git log -p
List of commits showing only commit messages and changes

git log -S 'something'
List of commits with the particular string you are looking for

git log --author 'Author Name'
List of commits by author

git log --oneline
Show a summary of the list of commits in a repository. This shows a shorter version of the commit ID and the commit message.

git log --since=yesterday
Show a list of commits in a repository since yesterday

git log --grep "term" --author "name"
Shows log by author and searching for a specific term inside the commit message
